---
layout: post
title:  "Box Diff Tool"
date:   2025-03-30 00:00:00 +0000
categories: OCaml,Box
tags: tunbury.org
image:
  path: /images/box-logo.png
  thumbnail: /images/thumbs/box-logo.png
---

Box has an unlimited storage model but has an upload limit of 1TB per month. I have been uploading various data silos but would now like to verify that the data is all present. Box has an extensive [API](https://developer.box.com/reference/), but I only need the [list items in folder](https://developer.box.com/reference/get-folders-id-items/) call.

The list-items call assumes that you have a folder ID which you would like to query. The root of the tree is always ID 0. To check for the presence of file `foo` in a folder tree `a/b/c/foo`, we need to call the API with folder ID 0. This returns a list of entries in that folder.  e.g.

```json
{
  "entries": [
    {
      "id": "12345",
      "type": "folder",
      "name": "a"
    }
  ]
}
```

The API must now be called again with the new ID number to get the contents of folder `a`. This is repeated until we finally have the entries for folder `c` which would contain the file itself. I have used a `Hashtbl` to cache the results of each call.

```json
{
  "entries": [
    {
      "id": "78923434",
      "type": "file",
      "name": "foo"
    }
  ]
}
```

Each call defaults to returning at most 100 entries. This can be increased to a maximum of 1000 by passing `?limit=1000` to the GET request. For more results, Box offers two pagination systems: `offset` and `marker`. Offset allows you to pass a starting item number along with the call, but this is limited to 10,000 entries.

> Queries with offset parameter value exceeding 10000 will be rejected with a 400 response.

To deal with folders of any size, we should use the marker system. For this, we pass `?usemarker=true` to the first GET request, which causes the API to return `next_marker` and `prev_marker` as required as additional JSON properties. Subsequent calls would use `?usemarker=true&marker=XXX`. The end is detected by the absence of the `next_marker` when no more entries are available.

The project can be found on GitHub in [mtelvers/ocaml-box-diff](https://github.com/mtelvers/ocaml-box-diff).
